Ink helps drive democracy Asia

Kyrgyz Republic, small, mountainous state of former Soviet republic, using invisible ink and ultraviolet readers country's elections as part of drive to prevent multiple voting.

new technology causing both worries and guarded optimism among different sectors of population. an effort to live up to its reputation 1990s as "an island of democracy", Kyrgyz President, Askar Akaev, pushed through law requiring use of ink during upcoming Parliamentary and Presidential elections. US government agreed to fund all expenses associated with decision.

Kyrgyz Republic seen by many experts as backsliding from high point it reached mid-1990s with hastily pushed through referendum 2003, reducing legislative branch to one chamber with 75 deputies. use of ink only one part of general effort to show commitment towards more open elections - German Embassy, Soros Foundation and Kyrgyz government have all contributed to purchase transparent ballot boxes.

actual technology behind ink not that complicated. ink sprayed on person's left thumb. It dries and not visible under normal light.

However, presence of ultraviolet light (of kind used to verify money) causes ink to glow with neon yellow light. entrance to each polling station, one election official will scan voter's fingers with UV lamp before allowing them to enter, and every voter will have his/her left thumb sprayed with ink before receiving ballot. If ink shows under UV light voter will not be allowed to enter polling station. Likewise, any voter who refuses to be inked will not receive ballot. These elections assuming even greater significance because of two large factors - upcoming parliamentary elections prelude to potentially regime changing presidential election Autumn as well as echo of recent elections other former Soviet Republics, notably Ukraine and Georgia. use of ink has been controversial - especially among groups perceived to be pro-government.

Widely circulated articles compared use of ink to rural practice of marking sheep - still common metaphor primarily agricultural society.

author of one such article began petition drive against use of ink. greatest part of opposition to ink has often been sheer ignorance. Local newspapers have carried stories that ink harmful, radioactive or even that ultraviolet readers may cause health problems. Others, such as aggressively middle of road, Coalition of Non-governmental Organizations, have lauded move as an important step forward. type of ink has been used many elections world, countries as varied as Serbia, South Africa, Indonesia and Turkey. other common type of ink elections indelible visible ink - but as elections Afghanistan showed, improper use of type of ink can cause additional problems. use of "invisible" ink not without its own problems. most elections, numerous rumors have spread about it.

Serbia, for example, both Christian and Islamic leaders assured their populations that its use was not contrary to religion. Other rumours associated with how to remove ink - various soft drinks, solvents and cleaning products put forward. However, reality, ink very effective getting under cuticle of thumb and difficult to wash off. ink stays on finger for least 72 hours and for up to week. use of ink and readers by itself not panacea for election ills. passage of inking law nevertheless, clear step forward towards free and fair elections." country's widely watched parliamentary elections scheduled for 27 February.

David Mikosz works for IFES, an international, non-profit organisation that supports building of democratic societies.
